>> I'm Sheila Kitzinger, and
I'm a social anthropologist
of birth.
There aren't many of us around.
I study women's experiences
in different cultures
all round the world
and how they're treated
and how the system, the
medical system works,
and how women feel about birth,
and how it affects their lives.
I also teach prenatal
classes and work
with women and couples.
In England, I was the first
to introduce couples classes.
And they'd come and sit
on my sitting room carpet
and talk about feelings, the
men as well as the women,
not just about whether
you should huff and puff
at this point or hold
your breath like mad.
It's very easy to treat
birth as a competitive sport
for which you have to do
all sorts of exercises.
And that's certainly
how it was in France
when I started teaching,
which was quite
different from the
Dick-Read approach, which
was about the barriers
created by fear of childbirth.
But the French stuff
was all very organized.
And women were in
competition with each other
about what they could
do, and how quickly they
could push a baby out,
and whether they were
using all the right muscles.
So I got very critical of that
particular approach to birth.
And since then, I've
worked with midwives.
I do a lot of
teaching of midwives
and indeed some teaching
of doctors and write books.
I think I've written 24 books.
You wouldn't think one
could write that much
perhaps about this
subject, but there
are all sorts of aspects of it
and breastfeeding of course,
too, and the misery of
childbirth for some women
and how they feel afterwards
compared with the joy
that they can also feel
>> Why do you do it?
>> I'm inspired by what I do.
I wouldn't ever want
to retire because it
seems to me that birth
has given me so much.
And I want to use that inner
dynamism, that energy that
comes from having been
blessed with wonderful births.
I'd had a wonderful
experience, a home birth.
And it seemed to me so awful
that all women couldn't
have an experience like
mine and come out of birth
feeling really positive.
And so that's when I started.
And well, now, I'm 81, so
you can sort of work it out.
I think the most important
elements for the mother
and the baby in the
birth experience
is that the woman feels
enriched and empowered to make
her own decisions and
comes out able to mother.
And mothering is-- it
demands a lot, mothering.
You have to learn from
the baby and indeed
learn from the child right
through the child's life
until the child is
adult and after.
And I think also
it's very important
that you find your own way and
don't rely on books and rules.
It is important to learn on
this transition to motherhood.
And having a baby is a
bridge to motherhood.
We have to be able to learn
how to walk confidently
on that bridge.
There is absolutely no evidence
that when there is a good care
system, home birth is any more
dangerous than hospital birth.
In fact, rather the opposite.
Because if you go
into hospital, you
are very likely
to have all sorts
of semi-routine interventions.
And many of these
interventions can be dangerous,
like induction of labor,
for example, using drugs,
especially if the cervix
is not already ripe.
And this often happens.
And then you're more likely
to have a Cesarean section
or a vaginally-assisted
delivery because induction leads
to problems with the
uterus and also above all
to clock-watched labor.
And we don't clock
watch, I don't know,
hyacinths coming up
through the ground.
We don't clock watch
everything else in nature.
But birth is
treated in hospitals
as if it weren't
supposed to be natural,
as if it's something that
has to be managed minutely.
And of course, each woman
is different anyway.
And I think there's a
tremendous fear of childbirth.
The culture of
fear in childbirth
has been around a long
time because certainly
Victorian women were
very frightened of birth.
Although sometimes, they had
extremely large families--
8, 9, 10 children.
But the intervention that
started when doctors took over
from midwives--
and that really was
beginning way back
in the last century for
women who were middle class
and could afford to
pay for a doctor--
I think that this
has meant that birth
has been seen as
an ordeal, rather
than a challenge and a joy
in which you can express
yourself and have a baby.
Interventions, obstetric
interventions, and indeed
even midwifery interventions,
such as saying you've
got to get lie on
the bed, or saying,
push, come on now, mother, push,
hold your breath and push--
these are interventions.
And all of these can lead
to interruption, in fact,
really taking over
normal labor so
that birth is made unnatural.
And the woman
doesn't get a chance
to express herself
spontaneously through her body.
This in turn affects the
baby because a baby isn't
an isolated little package, or
it certainly isn't like a doll
that you pick up, and then look
after, and change its dresses,
and wash it, and then
put it down when you're
no longer interested in it.
A baby is a human being
already with some personality
able to express itself.
And the great thing
with birth too
is that you reach out
your arms to greet
this new person with whom
you are in a relationship.
You learn from each other.
And you speak a language
which is not yet
in words, which is in all
sorts of sounds and touch.
This is the beginning of
the great adventure of life
and the basis of
education for society
for being able to
care for other people,
and relate to other
people, and respond
in a way that is harmonious.
We know that we actually
impose a challenge
on babies when they're not able
to communicate early at birth.
For example, we know that
after having a lot of drugs,
a baby may find
it very difficult
to relate to the mother
and to breastfeed.
The baby may not
come to the breast
spontaneously and grip
the breast with open mouth
like a flower around
the bud inside.
And a baby may then have
difficulties feeding.
And that may be the start of a
whole lot of other difficulties
in behavior.
And then the mother responds
thinking she's a rotten mother.
She can't even feed her baby.
And she hasn't got enough milk.
And she may blame the baby.
She may blame herself.
She may blame both.
So I think what we're looking
at is looked at in terms
of social relationships--
behavior.
We are actually imposing a
problem which needn't be there.
Women are not told usually that
interventions in childbirth
can affect
psychological outcomes,
can affect the interaction
between the mother
and the baby.
And that is a big omission.
It is treated usually as if
this is peripheral and rather
flimsy information and that
we're sort of new age hippies
if we're interested
in it at all.
And yet the way you
think about other people
and relate to other people
is basic to our existence
and to the creation of society.
I think women are
not being told this
because we treat
birth as something
that has to be
managed and that has
to have a system imposed on it.
And women who are interested in
doing other things, in singing
during birth, or dancing during
birth, or simply having a baby
at home, they really are very
irresponsible like children
themselves.
And you can't let them
get away with that
because they can harm the baby.
They can harm themselves.
It's really that women
are treated as if they're
utterly irresponsible.
And I see this as a matter of
discrimination against women.
What if something goes wrong?
Yes, of course, just as when
we cross the street and there's
traffic.
Anything can go
wrong in childbirth.
But good care during
pregnancy and preparation
for birth with women
knowing their options
and having the information for
this makes birth much safer.
And I think it's very
important if a woman has a home
birth that she
knows how she could
get to hospital, for example,
without a long period
of waiting for an ambulance
or delaying things
when there was some urgency
in getting to hospital.
There must always be the
option of having intervention,
but it shouldn't
be a first resort.
Because there are many ways--
and I learn this as I go around
the world working with women
in traditional societies--
there are many ways of dealing
with problems that often we
are not aware of
in our own society.
like getting women
up and again dancing,
and using rocking movements
of the pelvis to get
the baby rotated into
the correct position
and with a head down
ready for birth.
I'm fascinated when
I see these things
and listen to midwives
talking about what
they do when they're faced
with challenges like this.
Birth is a dance.
And we often don't realize this.
And I remember being
in one society.
Or was it Fiji?
Yes, I think it was.
Where I was interviewing a local
midwife, a traditional midwife.
And when you interview
in these societies,
you don't just
interview one person.
Everybody's interested.
So there were lots of
other women standing around
and children.
And they were listening
very carefully
to what she was saying
and what I was asking.
And I asked her some
questions about what
would happen if things
aren't straightforward.
And she struggled to
find an answer which
would fit with her idea of how
nontraditional midwives would
cope in the hospital, and what
would they do in the hospital.
She was trying very hard to
tell me the hospital rules.
And when she'd
done it, the women
all shouted out, no,
we don't do that.
And they started to
show what they did do.
And it was to dance.
And they started.
I joined in.
The kids joined in.
And we were all dancing.
In our Western society, children
don't learn very much usually
from their mothers
or other people.
What they learn about
is from television.
And you only have to switch
on a television program,
either a serious one which
is giving scientific stuff
about birth or any of the
marvelous serial programs
in which a woman is, for
example, giving birth
in the back of a taxi
because she didn't leave
for the hospital soon enough.
And people are leaning over her
trying to deliver over her leg.
And it's amazing how many women
on television in these comedy
programs don't make it
to hospital in time.
And terrible things result.
This is what children learn.
You talk to any child
about what they've
seen on television
about birth, and you'll
get information like this.
This-- this is how they learn.
This is what they learn.
It's perfectly
possible for a woman
to have a safe birth
in hospital if the rule
is that you are aiming for
a normal birth and a birth
without intervention.
And increasingly,
this is happening,
which is good, even in our
local hospital in Oxford, which
is a good hospital but which
is extremely high tech.
There is no ruling that there
should be non-interference
until it is very obvious that
something has to be done.
And I think this
make birth much safer
because it's this business
of one intervention leading
to another like
dominoes falling.
Once you start, you don't know
where you're going to stop.
And it probably will be
with a Cesarean section.
And then after that, you
have all the risks that
come with Cesarean sections.
It's very difficult to make--
to talk statistics there.
But cesarean section is
probably about three times
as dangerous for a woman as a
straightforward vaginal birth.
And these statistics
are obviously
collected in different ways
and in different places.
But we do know that there's
much greater risk of problems
with another pregnancy
and another birth
and that there's a danger
at this birth itself
of hemorrhage, infection,
and uterine rupture
with the uterus splitting open.
The progress that I
see taking place--
it comes in leaps and bounds.
And then we go back, and
then we go forward again.
The great thing
is for those of us
we want to change childbirth and
improve it that we keep at it,
and don't give way and
think we've failed,
and speak with a clear voice,
and join with other women
to speak.
After a birth with a great
deal of intervention,
a woman may at first feel
just happy to be beyond it.
The door's closed
on it, she thinks.
And it's over and done with.
And she doesn't mean to have
another baby very often.
And then some weeks after
or sometimes months,
she suddenly feels
utterly cheated,
and disempowered, and resentful,
and as if other women aren't
like this.
It's just her and she's failed.
And this often goes along
with flashbacks to events
during the birth--
somebody holding up a needle
to inject her, for example,
or a row of faces at the other
end of the delivery table
all staring at her vagina.
She thinks about this.
And it keeps on
coming back and not so
much as an intellectual
thought process, but much more
the feeling when she
goes hot, and shaky,
and shivery, and sweats,
and she has panic attacks.
And this is really
post-traumatic stress.
But interestingly, when
she goes to her doctor,
it's often diagnosed
as depression.
And she is then treated
with anti-depressants.
And that's the worst
thing that could be done.
She needs somebody
to listen to her.
She needs to work out how
she can get through this.
And when she has
anti-depressants,
she gets much worse.
And she wakes up in the
morning unable to face the day
and may develop panic attacks
about leaving the house,
for example, or she can't
walk past the hospital.
And again, she feels utterly
isolated from other women.
And she goes back, for example,
to classes after the birth.
To report on the
birth is the idea.
And she feels she can't.
She can't.
So it's very harmful.
I cannot tell you how many.
This is not statistical.
It's often reckoned that
up to, I don't know,
something like 7% of
women may experience this,
but I would have
thought far more.
But perhaps I get
that idea because I
get anything between three
and seven calls a week.
Some of them are repeat calls.
Because once I've talked with
a woman and listened to her,
I always say to her, look.
Let's keep in touch about this.
I'd love to hear what happens.
And perhaps I've
suggested that she
goes and talks to a midwife
or the obstetrician,
finds out more, certainly
sees her case notes
and goes through them.
And I can go through her
case notes with her as well.
But the great thing is to be
alongside her, not advising her
but with her as an
understanding friend,
and to gradually build
up her self-confidence
so she can cope.
Of course, a woman
gets justifiably angry
if she's had a Cesarean
section after a difficult birth
and then is told she's not
going to be able to bond
with her baby.
Well, with a little
bit of help, of course
she can bond with her baby
and her baby with her.
It sounds almost as if you
haven't waved the magic wand.
And so this is what happens.
Here is you and the baby and
no connection between you.
Well, obviously, that's
ridiculous if she gets support,
but women do need continuing
support both during pregnancy
and I think afterwards.
I mean, certainly right
through the what we
used to call the third world.
Right through
traditional societies,
there are always other
women supporting a woman
after childbirth, maybe with
her during childbirth too.
But they're there to give
help afterwards and allow her
a chance to nurture
herself a bit
and not feel she has to be
cooking her husband's meals
or doing anything which
isn't in the nest.
And women do need a nest,
I think, after childbirth.
And it doesn't mean you're ill.
It doesn't mean you
have to be on the bed
if you don't fancy that.
You might be lying
in the garden.
You might be out swimming.
But you're your own person.
And you don't have to
think about everybody else
all the time.
Now, this is tricky once
you already have children.
I had five under six, was it?
Or five under seven.
I can't quite remember.
It's all a blur in my mind now.
But obviously, I had to give
attention to the other children
as well.
And it was quite
an exciting time.
And I think I learned from it.
PTSD, post-traumatic
stress disorder,
can happen to any woman.
It doesn't mean that
she's weak or that she's
failed in any way.
She can be an
absolutely normal woman
who's been subjected
to abnormal stress.
That's the essence of it.
And so it is for a
man who has PTSD,
men who have it after
battle, for example,
because we first
learned about PTSD
from treatment of soldiers.
So it isn't particularly female.
And it doesn't mean that the
woman is unable to pull herself
together.
And she's often told if she is
miserable after birth, come on.
There are women having
babies all over the world.
Get on with it, woman.
And people get so
irritated with her.
And often, they are her
nearest and dearest.
And she's being treated
as an incompetent child.
And it's very-- it adds to
the distress, of course.
A woman is more
likely to develop PTSD
if she feels that all control
has been taken from her
and she is the passive object of
other people's administrations.
She isn't asked for
consent, for example,
for different maneuvers
which they may do.
She's supposed to shut
up, and get on with it,
and let them do the birth.
And she comes out of
that feeling helpless.
And this helplessness
can persist
in other areas of her life too.
So it's not just the birth.
But she gives up and feels
that it isn't justified
for her to take over
responsibility for anything.
And women can feel this
for many, many years.
I've had women in
their 60s and 70s
ring me to talk about births
which they haven't yet
worked through.
And this experience
has stayed with them
and incapacitated them.
I mean, I was astonished
when this first happened.
But now I'm very
relaxed about it.
And yes, of course,
it can go on.
If you haven't been able
to come to terms with it,
it becomes innate.
And you think it's just you.
Women very often feel that
their feelings are unworthy,
that somehow they have let the
side down suddenly as women.
And they get very
apologetic about it.
But PTSD, when this happens,
it is a normal response
to abnormal stress.
Normally, I mean,
I often get women,
for example, who
are teachers who
teach perhaps large
classes, sometimes
of children with all
sorts of problems
and or who experience violence
in one form or another.
And they will think, I
can be in control there.
But why did I behave in
this awful way during birth
and giving up, handing
over, and also afterwards
in continually going back to
the birth and how polluting
and disempowering
it has made me feel?
And I think this
is a major problem
that a woman has a
perception of herself which
is at odds with her normal
perception of herself
and feeling able to cope.
I think some low-risk women
are choosing Cesarean section
because they're scared
witless and because they
feel the power of the
medical establishment,
the power of obstetrics.
And unfortunately, midwives
feel like this too.
I have midwives ringing me
up who feel disempowered
or in a birth have not been able
to do what they spontaneously
wanted to do for a
woman like, for example,
put their arms around
her or get her up
and moving because it's
not allowed in the system.
There is a great fight going
on between obstetricians
and other obstetricians
who are much more
liberal and midwives
for whom midwifery
is being with a woman, not
necessarily even speaking
to her, but being right there
with her giving her strength.
And I think this will change.
I think it's got so bad
in places like Australia
and in places like New Jersey,
for example, where there's
a very high percentage
of Cesarean sections
60-something percent.
Where this happens, you've
really come to breaking point
where the system has to change.
And it is a human rights issue.
In a system like
that of Australia
where a women's right
to have a baby at home
and to have a
midwife is really--
it's being taken
away progressively
and so that women feel
very guilty and angry when
they can't do these things or
else just submit and think ah,
well.
They know what's what.
They're professionals.
I think it's very
important that we first
of all listen to the people who
are trying to impose the rules.
There's always a reason why
people try and impose rules.
And that includes politicians.
And sometimes, it's
quite disturbing
that because they've
been through what they've
been through, they
think these rules have
to be made for other women.
They get the wrong
end of the stick.
And I always, when
I'm sitting, and I
would be the same if I
was talking to your health
minister, I want to know
what the experience is
for that woman not necessarily--
if it is a woman, yes,
perhaps once she gave birth,
but also other things,
yes, other things in which
she's either felt able to
make choices with the right
information or has
felt that she couldn't.
It was too far too dangerous
to make any choices
because I think we
need to understand
what makes them tick.
A woman may decide to
face the challenge of pain
in labor partly because
this pain is really rather
different from other pain.
It's the pain of creation,
of mountains moving,
the pain of energy welling
up from your pelvis
filling yourself
and all around you.
Now, you can either see that
as something constructive
or as something which
actually implies
you're going to die any moment.
And there are some women who
will think the pain of labor
indicates near death, destroys
them utterly, and others who
will be able, because of the
environment in which they're
giving birth and the
support they're getting
and the love that's flying over
them, to express themselves
spontaneously.
And then pain becomes
something quite different.
The risk if a woman decides to
have everything blotted out,
to be a passive patient and
to have things done to her
which she doesn't even
have explained properly,
I think the risk is that she
loses the spontaneous part
of herself in which
she can let go, release
completely, and feel exultant.
And she'll never
know or she may never
know later what she
missed because she
hasn't experienced this.